---
ID: 2690
post_title: Zenika devient partenaire SpringSource
author: Carl Azoury
post_date: 2008-09-01 16:27:00
post_excerpt: '<p>Depuis peu la société Zenika est devenue partenaire “System Integrator” de la société SpringSource. Ce partenariat va nous permettre de compléter notre offre auprès de nos clients afin de leur faire bénéficier des outils dédiés aux applications développées avec le Framework Spring ainsi que de l’expertise autour de Tomcat et Apache (Stack de plus en plus présente au sein des entreprises pour les environnements de production)</p>'
layout: post
permalink: http://blog.zenika-offres.com/?p=2690
published: true
---
<p>Depuis peu la société Zenika est devenue partenaire “System Integrator” de la société SpringSource. Ce partenariat va nous permettre de compléter notre offre auprès de nos clients afin de leur faire bénéficier des outils dédiés aux applications développées avec le Framework Spring ainsi que de l’expertise autour de Tomcat et Apache (Stack de plus en plus présente au sein des entreprises pour les environnements de production)</p>
<!--more-->
<p><strong>PARIS, August 25, 2008</strong> – Zenika, an IT consulting firm specializing in Enterprise Java architecture and technologies, announced that it has become a Systems Integrator Partner of SpringSource, the company behind Spring.</p> <p>“The alliance with SpringSource enables us to provide our customers with more efficient services based on the Spring Portfolio. With more than five million downloads to date, Spring has become the dominant platform for Java applications,” said Carl Azoury, Director, Zenika.</p> <p>“Using Spring has helped us for a long time now delivering maintainable and high-quality applications while reducing the costs. This partnership will enable us to take this commitment one step further by being able to provide our customers with trainings and production support for Spring as well as for Apache HTTP and Apache Tomcat, environnements where production support offers has been lacking until now”.</p> <p>“I welcome Zenika as a Systems Integrator Partner in France” said Julien Dubois, France Regional Director, SpringSource. “Zenika has a strong presence in the Java/JEE community now and this partnership will help us jointly deliver Spring and SpringSource-enabled solutions and consulting to clients.”</p> <p>SpringSource and Zenika will jointly deliver Spring and SpringSource-enabled solutions and consulting to clients as well as participate in joint sales and marketing activities. The SystemIntegrator partnership enforces the vision shared by Zenika and SpringSource on the momentum and leading capacities of the Open Source community and products. For these very reasons we will organize in France numerous events with leading people from this community.”</p> <h5>About SpringSource</h5> <p>SpringSource is the company behind Spring, the de facto standard in enterprise Java. SpringSource is a leading provider of enterprise Java infrastructure software, and delivers enterprise class software, support and services to help organizations utilize Spring and, through its acquisition of Covalent, manages infrastructure technologies from the Apache Software Foundation. <br />
Nearly half of the Global 2000, including many of the world’s largest financial institutions, retailers, manufacturers, healthcare, technology and public sector clients are SpringSource customers.</p> <p>For more information visit: <a href="http://www.springsource.com/">www.springsource.com</a></p> <h5>About Zenika</h5> <p>Zenika is an IT consulting firm specializing in Enterprise Java architecture and technologies. Our team is made of experienced professionals with solid backgrounds, well-versed in new technologies and constantly mastering the most innovative and relevant tools and frameworks. <br />
We strive to design, develop and deploy high-quality Java-based systems that fit the size and the goals of your projects, based on open source software. From initial business requirements to user acceptance, Zenika’s consultants will provide custom follow-ups throughout the complete project lifecycle. <br />
Our training department provides Zenika’s customers durable and valuable knowledge on the architectures we put in place and offers trainings that are perfectly adapted and tailored to our clients’ contexts and needs.”</p> <p>For more information visit: <a href="http://www.zenika.com/">www.zenika.com</a>.</p>